>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 5: ENTERING
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN'S
FINAL DAYS, HILLARY CLINTON AND
DONALD TRUMP RALLY SUPPORTERS TO
GET OUT AND VOTE; IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WHAT'S AT
STAKE IN NORTH CAROLINA, WHERE
THE CANDIDATES ARE RUNNING NECK
AND NECK; AND, HOW AND WHY SOME
VOTERS IN BATTLEGROUND STATES
ARE SWAPPING VOTES WITH PEOPLE
IN NON-BATTLEGROUND STATES.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THIS FINAL WEEKEND OF THE
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN SEES THE
CANDIDATES CRISSCROSSING THE
COUNTRY, ENCOURAGING SUPPORTERS
TO VOTE AND APPEALING TO
UNDECIDED VOTERS.
NO STATE HAS GOTTEN MORE
PERSONAL ATTENTION FROM HILLARY
CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP THAN
FLORIDA, AND BOTH WERE THERE
AGAIN TODAY.
BEFORE HEADING TO NORTH
CAROLINA, NEVADA AND COLORADO,
TRUMP REITERATED TO FLORIDA
VOTERS HIS KEY PROMISES IN THIS
CAMPAIGN: REPEAL AND REPLACE
OBAMACARE; LOWER TAXES ON
AMERICAN BUSINESSES; AND BUILD A
WALL ALONG THE U.S. BORDER WITH
MEXICO TO SLOW ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION.
>> MY CONTRACT WITH THE AMERICAN
VOTER BEGINS WITH A PLAN TO END
GOVERNMENT CORRUPTION AND TO
TAKE BACK OUR COUNTRY FROM
THE SPECIAL INTERESTS.
WHEN WE WIN ON NOVEMBER 8, WE
ARE GOING TO DRAIN THE SWAMP.
>> Stewart: TRUMP'S WIFE,
MELANIA, APPEARED WITH HIM IN
WILMINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA, BUT
NEITHER COMMENTED ON THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORT
PUBLISHED TODAY FINDING MELANIA,
WHO IS FROM SLOVENIA, ARRIVED
IN THE UNITED STATES IN 1996,
WORKED AS A MODEL FOR SEVEN
WEEKS BEFORE SHE HAD A PROPER
WORK VISA TO DO SO.
BEFORE RETURNING TO PENNSYLVANIA
TONIGHT, CLINTON CAMPAIGNED IN
THE MIAMI-FORT LAUDERDALE AREA
AND SPOKE TO SUPPORTERS IN A
RALLY CUT SHORT BY A DOWNPOUR.
>> I HAVE SPENT MY CAREER
FIGHTING FOR KIDS AND FAMILIES,
AND, IF YOU ELECT ME, THAT'S
WHAT I'LL KEEP DOING!
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Stewart: HER FLORIDA STOP
FOLLOWS VISITS YESTERDAY TO
MICHIGAN, PENNSYLVANIA AND OHIO,
WHERE SUPERSTAR COUPLE JAY-Z AND
BEYONCE HEADLINED A FREE "GET
OUT THE VOTE" CONCERT FOR HER
LAST NIGHT IN CLEVELAND.
>> I WANT MY DAUGHTER TO GROW UP
SEEING A WOMAN LEAD OUR COUNTRY
AND KNOW THAT HER POSSIBILITIES
ARE LIMITLESS.
>> Stewart: AT LEAST 33 MILLION
OF THE NATION'S 200 MILLION
REGISTERED VOTERS HAVE VOTED
EARLY.
IN NEVADA, 46,000 MORE DEMOCRATS
HAVE VOTED EARLY OR BY ABSENTEE
THAN REPUBLICANS, ACCORDING TO
ITS SECRETARY OF STATE.
THAT IS CLOSE TO THE SAME LEAD
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD IN EARLY
VOTING IN 2012, WHEN HE CARRIED
THE STATE.
IN FLORIDA, 5.7 MILLION PEOPLE,
OR 45% OF THE STATE'S 12.7
MILLION REGISTERED VOTERS, HAVE
CAST A BALLOT IN THE EARLY
VOTING PERIOD THAT ENDS
TOMORROW.
JOINING ME NOW FROM TALLAHASSEE
TO DISCUSS THE BATTLE FOR
FLORIDA IS MARY ELLEN KLAS.
SHE'S THE CAPITAL BUREAU CHIEF
FOR THE "MIAMI HERALD" AND CO-
BUREAU CHIEF FOR THE "TAMPA BAY
TIMES."
MARY ELLEN, SO WHO'S LEFT AT
THIS POINT?
WHO ARE TRUMP AND CLINTON
COURTING WHILE THEY'RE SPENDING
ALL THIS TIME IN FLORIDA THESE
LAST THREE DAYS?
>> WELL, IT IS PRETTY CLEAR THAT
BOTH OF THEM ARE WORKING-- TRUMP
IS WORKING TO WIN FLORIDA, WHICH
HE NEEDS IT.
AND-- AND CLINTON IS WORKING TO
WIN FLORIDA TO KEEP IT FROM
TRUMP BECAUSE WITHOUT FLORIDA,
IT'S VERY UNLIKELY HE HAS A PATH
TO THE WHITE HOUSE.
IT IS-- IT LOOKS AS THOUGH THE
EARLY VOTING NUMBERS INDICATE
THAT DEMOCRATS MIGHT HAVE THE
EDGE BECAUSE EVEN THOUGH IT'S--
WE'VE GOT ABOUT 40% OF
DEMOCRATS, EARLY VOTERS SHOWING
UP, 40% REPUBLICANS, AND THE
BULK ARE NO PARTY AFFILIATED,
THOSE "NO PARTY AFILLIATED"
VOTERS MORE THAN HALF OF THEM
ARE FIRST-TIME VOTERS AND A
MAJORITY OF THEM ARE HISPANIC.
AND THAT MAY SWING THINGS AS AN
ADVANTAGE FOR CLINTON
>> Stewart: WHAT'S CHANGED
ABOUT THE DEMOGRAPHICS IN
FLORIDA IN THE PAST FOUR YEARS
THAT WOULD HAVE AN IMPACT THIS
TIME AROUND?
>> WELL, FLORIDA HAS GAINED A
LOT OF POPULATION.
YOU KNOW, 1.4 MILLION PEOPLE
HAVE MOVED TO FLORIDA.
AND MORE THAN HALF OF THOSE NEW
PEOPLE, HOWEVER, HAVE BEEN
HISPANICS.
AND THEY HAVE-- MANY OF THEM ARE
PUERTO RICANS, AND UNLIKE PEOPLE
FROM OTHER LATIN AMERICAN
COUNTRIES, WHEN PUERTO RICANS
COME TO FLORIDA, THEY CAN
REGISTER TO VOTE IMMEDIATELY
BECAUSE THEY'RE CITIZENS.
SO WE HAVE WATCHED AS THE NUMBER
OF HISPANICS GROW AND THE UNIQUE
THING IS, THEY ARE THE ONES THAT
ARE TURNING OUT THIS ELECTION
CYCLE.
I THINK THAT THERE'S A CHANCE
THAT HISPANICS COULD DO FOR
HILLARY CLINTON IN FLORIDA WHAT
BLACKS DID IN 2008 FOR BARACK
OBAMA, AND THAT IS HAND HER THE
STATE.
THE OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC GROUP THAT
EMERGED AND CONTINUES TO GROW
ARE RETIREES.
THEY TEND TO BE WHITE, AND THEY
HAVE MOVED TO THE CENTER OF THE
STATE IN RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES.
AND THEY ARE THE ONES THAT I
THINK TRUMP IS COUNTING ON TO BE
HIS RELIABLE VOTERS.
>> Stewart: THERE ARE A FEW
BIG BALLOT INITIATIVES IN
FLORIDA.
THERE'S ONE FOR LEGALIZING
MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
THERE'S ONE DEALING WITH SOLAR
POWER, A COUPLE OF TAX
EXEMPTIONS.
DO ANY OF THOSE INITIATIVES,
ARE ANY OF THEM DRIVING PEOPLE
TO THE POLLS?
AND IF SO, WHO WOULD THEY DRIVE
>> WELL, I DO THINK THE MEDICAL
MARIJUANA INITIATIVE IS ONE THAT
IS DRIVING PEOPLE.
THAT HAS OVERWHELMING SUPPORT,
ACCORDING TO THE PUBLIC OPINION
POLLS.
THE OTHER AMENDMENT IS BEING
PURSUED BY THE UTILITY
COMPANIES, AND IT'S REALLY
DESIGNED-- IT WAS KIND OF
DESIGNED AS A DEFENSE MECHANISM
AGAINST ANOTHER AMENDMENT THAT
NEVER MADE IT TO THE BALLOT.
NOW THAT IT'S ON THE BALLOT AND
THEY DID USE IT TO PUT LANGUAGE
IN THAT WILL LIMIT ROOFTOP
SOLAR EXPANSION-- OR COULD
POTENTIALLY LIMIT IT-- THERE ARE
A LOT OF SOLAR ADVOCATES THAT
ARE MOTIVATED TO VOTE BECAUSE
THEY WANT TO VOTE AGAINST THAT
AMENDMENT.
IT'S HARD TO TELL WHO THAT WILL
ADVANTAGE, THOUGH.
I THINK WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT
MARIJUANA-- MEDICAL MARIJUANA,
THERE ARE PEOPLE ON BOTH SIDES--
CLINTON SUPPORTERS AND TRUMP
SUPPORTERS -- WHO FEEL STRONGLY
ON THAT-- ABOUT THAT ISSUE.
AND I THINK IT'S-- WHEN IT COMES
TO THE SOLAR AMENDMENT, THAT
SEEMS TO BE A DEMOCRAT ISSUE
THAT MANY DEMOCRATS HAVE ALIGNED
WITH, AND DEMOCRAT SUPPORTERS.
BUT IT ALSO HAS A TREMENDOUS
SUPPORT IN FLORIDA AMONG TEA
PARTY CONSERVATIVES, AND SORT OF
PEOPLE WHO DON'T WANT THE
UTILITIES TO BE TELLING THEM
WHAT THEY CAN PUT ON THEIR
ROOFS.
>> Stewart: MARY ELLEN KLAS,
THANKS FOR JOINING US FROM
TALLAHASSEE.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Stewart: ALONG WITH FLORIDA,
OHIO AND PENNSYLVANIA, NORTH
CAROLINA IS IN THE TOP TIER OF
BATTLEGROUND STATES THIS
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WITH 15
ELECTORAL VOTES UP FOR GRABS.
SINCE THEIR NOMINATING
CONVENTIONS, NOT A WEEK HAS
PASSED WITHOUT EITHER HILLARY
CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP OR
THEIR RUNNING MATES VISITING THE
TAR HEEL STATE.
THE STATE IS SECOND ONLY TO
FLORIDA IN VISITS BY THE TWO
CAMPAIGNS.
CLINTON WAS THERE YESTERDAY,
TRUMP WAS THERE TODAY.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT NICK
SCHIFRIN INTRODUCES US TO SOME
OF THE PEOPLE TRYING TO KEEP
NORTH CAROLINA RED, AND THOSE
TRYING TO TURN IT BACK TO BLUE.
>> ♪ WELL, I WOKE UP THIS
MORNING WITH MY MIND... ♪
>> ♪ ...STAYED ON FREEDOM.
>> Reporter: IN DOWNTOWN
ASHEVILLE, ON THE WESTERN EDGE
OF NORTH CAROLINA, THE REVEREND
WILLIAM BARBER'S GATHERING IS AS
MUCH REVIVAL AS RALLY.
>> AND I'M TELLING YOU, IN THIS
TIME, YOU BETTER, WE BETTER VOTE
NOW.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: HE'S THE PRESIDENT
OF THE NORTH CAROLINA N.A.A.C.P.
AND AN OUTSPOKEN, PROGRESSIVE
PREACHER.
THESE DAYS, HIS BENEDICTION IS A
BATTLE CRY.
>> EVERY TIME MOVEMENTS HAVE
EXERCISED THEIR FAITH AND DONE
WHAT WE'RE SUPPOSED TO DO, EVIL
IS SHUT DOWN AND GOD SHOWS UP.
>> Reporter: BARBER IS AT THE
VANGUARD OF A NEW NORTH
CAROLINA, TRYING TO UNITE
PROGRESSIVE WHITE VOTERS WITH
BLACK AND LATINO VOTERS.
THAT COALITION PROPELLED BARACK
OBAMA TO A VICTORY HERE IN 2008.
IT'S THE SAME COALITION HILLARY
CLINTON NEEDS TO WIN.
>> THAT WILL BE THE SAVING GRACE
OF THIS DEMOCRACY-- OUR
DIVERSITY, UNITED IN A WAY THAT
IS TRANSFORMED INTO POLITICAL
AND MORAL POWER.
>> Reporter: LAST WEEK IN
WINSTON-SALEM, NORTH CAROLINA,
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA
IMPLORED THE COALITION THAT
VOTED FOR HER HUSBAND TO HEED
BARBER'S CALL TO VOTE.
>> IF HILLARY DOESN'T WIN THIS
ELECTION, THAT WILL BE ON US.
IT WILL BE BECAUSE WE DID NOT
STAND WITH HER.
>> Reporter: IN 2008, OBAMA
BECAME THE FIRST DEMOCRAT TO
CARRY NORTH CAROLINA SINCE JIMMY
CARTER.
THE BACKLASH FOLLOWED.
IN 2012, OBAMA LOST TO MITT
ROMNEY, AND REPUBLICANS WON THE
GOVERNOR'S MANSION AND BOTH
HOUSES OF THE STATE LEGISLATURE.
THEY PASSED LAWS THAT INCREASED
VOTER ID REQUIREMENTS.
BARBER LED THE PUSH TO REPEAL
THEM, AND A FEDERAL APPEALS
COURT AGREED, SAYING THEY
"TARGETED AFRICAN-AMERICANS WITH
ALMOST SURGICAL PRECISION."
HE CONTINUES TO FIGHT WHAT HE
CALLS ONGOING VOTER SUPPRESSION
AND WIDESPREAD RACISM.
>> YOU EVER NOTICE YOU DIDN'T
HEAR ANYTHING ABOUT FRAUD UNTIL
ALL THE PEOPLE VOTED FOR
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
YOU DIDN'T HEAR ANYTHING UNTIL
BLACK PEOPLE STARTING VOTING AT
69-70%.
>> EVERYBODY, CLAP YOUR HANDS.
>> Reporter: IF CLINTON'S GOING
TO WIN, SHE WILL HAVE TO
REVITALIZE THE OBAMA COALITION.
61-YEAR-OLD DEMOCRAT TYRONE
GREENLEE IS AS MUCH PRO-CLINTON
AS ANTI-TRUMP.
>> I THINK HE IS THREATENING TO
DRAG US BACK TO A PLACE THAT IS
UNFAIR AND INEQUITABLE FOR
PEOPLE OF COLOR AND WOMEN AND
THOSE WHO ARE UNDOCUMENTED, AND
FOR SO MANY SEGMENTS OF OUR
SOCIETY.
AND I THINK THAT HILLARY
UNDERSTANDS JUSTICE FOR ALL.
>> Reporter: BUT CLINTON HAS
STRUGGLED TO INSPIRE ENTHUSIASM
AMONG DEMOCRATIC VOTERS LIKE DAN
PERLMUTTER.
HE VOTED FOR BERNIE SANDERS AND
PLANS TO VOTE FOR GREEN PARTY
CANDIDATE JILL STEIN OVER
CLINTON.
>> EVERYBODY IS SAYING DONALD
TRUMP IS BULLYING HER AND STUFF,
BUT, YOU KNOW, HE'S ASKING TOUGH
QUESTIONS THAT SHE WON'T ANSWER.
>> THERE WILL BE A MORAL
REVOLUTION OF...
>> Reporter: TO TRY AND OVERCOME
THOSE DOUBTS, BARBER APPEALS TO
MORALITY.
HE BELIEVES THE COALITION CAN
HELP CREATE ANOTHER CIVIL RIGHTS
MOVEMENT.
>> AND I SEE BLACK AND WHITE AND
YOUNG AND OLD AND GAY AND
STRAIGHT COMING TOGETHER, AND
LATINOS AND NATIVES.
I KNOW THAT THE SOUTH IS RISING
AGAIN FOR A FRESH
TRANSFORMATION!
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: FOR HILLARY CLINTON
TO WIN NORTH CAROLINA, IT WILL
NOT ONLY BE BECAUSE SHE RE-
ENERGIZED THE SAME COALITION OF
BLACK, YOUNG AND URBAN EDUCATED
WHITE VOTERS; IT WILL ALSO BE
BECAUSE SHE CONVINCED ENOUGH
WHITE VOTERS OUTSIDE OF NORTH
CAROLINA CITIES, LIKE HERE, IN
THE APPALACHIAN MOUNTAINS.
NESTLED IN THESE MOUNTAINS IS
WATAUGA COUNTY, WHERE RIVERS
MEANDER THROUGH FALL COLORS.
COUNTY COMMISSIONER PERRY YATES
IS RUNNING FOR RE-ELECTION.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I'M CHRISTIAN,
I'M CONSERVATIVE, AND THEN I'M
REPUBLICAN.
>> Reporter: HE BELIEVES DONALD
TRUMP CAN FIX WHAT HE CALLS A
BROKEN SYSTEM.
>> I THINK THE REASON THAT
PEOPLE ARE SUPPORTING MR. TRUMP
IS THEY'RE TIRED OF STATUS QUO.
WE'VE TRIED REPUBLICANS, WE'VE
TRIED DEMOCRATS, AND HE'S AN
ALTERNATIVE THAT APPEALS.
I THINK HE SAYS HE'S GOT A
MOVEMENT.
>> Reporter: IN THE LOCAL DINER,
THOMPSON'S SEAFOOD AND COUNTRY
COOKING, YATES GOES TABLE TO
TABLE.
>> I'M A CONSERVATIVE.
I DON'T WASTE YOUR MONEY.
>> Reporter: OUT HERE, POLITICS
IS SO LOCAL, HE GIVES HIS CELL
PHONE NUMBER OUT TO CONSTITUENTS
HE'S JUST MET.
>> YOU CALL ME ANYTIME YOU NEED
ME.
>> Reporter: IN THIS COUNTY,
REGISTERED INDEPENDENTS
OUTNUMBER REGISTERED DEMOCRATS
AND REPUBLICANS.
95% OF RESIDENTS ARE WHITE.
FOR DONALD TRUMP TO WIN THE
STATE, HE NEEDS TO COUNTERACT
THAT OBAMA COALITION BY
INSPIRING A HUGE TURNOUT HERE.
>> HOW ARE YOU, MR. GREENE?
>> Reporter: BUT THAT APPEAL
COULD BE DEPRESSED BY REGISTERED
REPUBLICANS LIKE THE GREENES,
WHO SAY TRUMP DOESN'T ALIGN
WITH THEIR CONSERVATIVE BELIEFS.
>> SOME OF HIS THOUGHTS IN THE
PAST HAVE NOT NECESSARILY
BALANCED OUT WITH THOSE VALUES,
SO I'M NOT SURE THAT HE IS A
TRUE CONSERVATIVE.
>> Reporter: HIS WIFE, TERRY,
WORRIES ABOUT TRUMP'S
TEMPERAMENT.
>> WHEN HE CAN'T EVEN KEEP IT
TOGETHER DURING A DEBATE, AND IN
CONTROL, HOW IS HE GOING TO DO
THAT IN THE HEAT OF A SERIOUS
POLITICAL CONVERSATION?
>> Reporter: TO COUNTERACT THOSE
DOUBTS, TRUMP HAS CAMPAIGNED IN
NORTH CAROLINA BY TRYING TO
SPEAK TO RESIDENTS WHO FEEL
THEIR LIVELIHOODS ARE
THREATENED.
IN WATAUGA COUNTY, THE POVERTY
RATE IS NEARLY DOUBLE THE
NATIONAL AVERAGE.
TRUMP SUPPORTER LESTER
ALLENTRIVETTE, WHO'S BEHIND THE
REGISTER, HOPED TO RETIRE THIS
YEAR.
INSTEAD, HE'S WORKING TWO JOBS
TO PAY HIS BILLS.
>> LOCAL PEOPLE DON'T FEEL
WELCOME ANYMORE.
WHEN THEY ARE FORCED TO HAVE
TO SELL THEIR PROPERTY TO PAY
THEIR TAXES, THEY FEEL UNWELCOME
BECAUSE THEY JUST CAN'T AFFORD
TO HANG ON.
>> Reporter: THEY BELIEVE TRUMP
CAN FIX AN ECONOMY AND
GOVERNMENT THAT HAVEN'T IMPROVED
THEIR LIVES.
>> HOPE AND CHANGE CAME ALONG,
AND WE'RE DEEPER IN DEBT.
THEN, THE CONGRESS CAME ALONG
AND SAID, "HEY, WE'RE GOING TO
TURN THIS AROUND," AND WE'RE
DEEPER IN DEBT.
>> Reporter: THAT MESSAGE SEEMED
TO STICK WITH SOME EARLY VOTERS
WE MET IN BOONE, WATAUGA
COUNTY'S LARGEST TOWN.
>> I'M FED UP WITH BOTH PARTIES,
WITH THE LYING AND THE
DECEPTIONS.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN TIM
WILSON WANTS TRUMP TO FOLLOW
THROUGH ON A PROMISE TO PRESS
FOR CONGRESSIONAL TERM LIMITS.
>> HE MAY NOT BE ABLE TO INSTALL
THEM, BUT HE WOULD HAVE A LOT OF
INFLUENCE ON GETTING THEM
INSTALLED.
AND I THINK THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WOULD VOTE FOR THAT.
>> Reporter: KIM ROBERTS IS A
REGISTERED INDEPENDENT WHO SPLIT
HER TICKET, VOTING FOR SOME
DEMOCRATS DOWN BALLOT BUT FOR
TRUMP OVER CLINTON.
>> I WISH I DIDN'T HAVE TO VOTE
FOR EITHER OF THEM, BUT, IN THE
LONG RUN, I FEEL HE'LL DO LESS
HARM THAN SHE WOULD.
>> Reporter: ELIZABETH McKINNEY
IS A PRO-ABORTION RIGHTS
DEMOCRAT WHO WENT FOR CLINTON.
>> I BELIEVE SHE SUPPORTS
WOMEN'S RIGHTS.
I BELIEVE SHE IS MORE FAIR AND
EQUAL.
AND I DON'T TRUST DONALD TRUMP.
>> Reporter: NORTH CAROLINA'S
RIFTS HAVE MADE THIS STATE AS
DIVIDED AS EVER.
HILLSBOROUGH, OUTSIDE RALEIGH-
DURHAM, ONCE PRIDED ITSELF ON
ITS CIVILITY.
>> HILLARY CLINTON, I MEAN,
SHE'S BEEN PROVED TO BE A LIAR
AND A LIAR AND A LIAR AND A LIAR
OVER AGAIN.
>> Reporter: DANIEL ASHLEY IS
THE LOCAL REPUBLICAN CHAIRMAN.
HE BELIEVES CLINTON IS DISHONEST
AND CORRUPT, AND THAT TRUMP
SPEAKS TO THREE IMPORTANT
REPUBLICAN VALUES.
>> THE ECONOMICS, THE ABORTION
ISSUE, ALL THE WAY DOWN TO BEING
STRONG ON DEFENSE.
>> Reporter: IT WAS HIS PARTY
HEADQUARTERS THAT WAS VANDALIZED
LAST MONTH WITH A MESSAGE, "NAZI
REPUBLICANS, LEAVE TOWN OR
ELSE," THEN THE OFFICE WAS
FIREBOMBED.
IT GOT SO HOT IN HERE THAT,
LOOK, THIS IS PLASTIC, AND IT
ALL MELTED.
AND LOOK HOW MUCH SOOT IS STILL
ON THE WALL.
EVELYN POOLE-KOBER IS THE VICE
CHAIR.
SHE HAS WORKED IN POLITICS SINCE
THE EARLY '60s.
>> IF WE HAD GONE BY THAT SIGN
THAT WAS WRITTEN ON THE WALL
TO-- AND WE'RE NOT NAZIS, WE'RE
NOT HATERS-- BUT IF WE HAD LET
THAT SIGN INTIMIDATE US, WE
JUST WOULD BE GIVING IN TO HATE.
>> Reporter: SYMPATHETIC
DEMOCRATS RAISED ALMOST $13,000
TO REBUILD THE OFFICE.
IN THIS SEASON OF DISCONTENT,
PERHAPS POOLE-KOBER SPEAKS FOR
BOTH SIDES WHEN SHE APPEALS TO
GRACE.
>> I SILENTLY PRAYED THAT THE
PERSON OR PEOPLE WHO DID THIS
WOULD... THAT I COULD FORGIVE
THEM, AND THAT THEY COULD COME
TO SOME BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF
ABOUT OUR POLITICAL PROCESS.
>>ELECTION DAY, 2016: THE
HISTORIC END TO A LONG
CAMPAIGN.
WHO WILL VOTERS ELECT AS THE
NEXT PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES?
WHICH PARTY WILL CONTROL
CONGRESS?
WHAT ELSE WILL WE LEARN FROM
THE VOTERS?
JOIN PBS NEWSHOUR FOR SPECIAL
ELECTION NIGHT COVERAGE,
ANALYSIS YOU WON'T FIND
ANYWHERE ELSE.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 8, STARTING
AT 8:00, 7:00 CENTRAL, ONLY ON
PBS.
>> Stewart: THE SO-CALLED
BATTLEGROUND STATES GET MUCH OF
THE PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES'
PERSONAL ATTENTION IN AN EFFORT
TO ATTRACT SWING VOTERS.
HOWEVER, IN SOLIDLY BLUE OR RED
STATES, MANY FEEL THEIR VOTES
MIGHT NOT MATTER AS MUCH AS
THOSE CAST IN PLACES WHERE THE
RACE IS TIGHT.
BUT NOW, SOME BELIEVE THEY HAVE
FOUND A WAY TO MAKE THEIR VOTES
HAVE AN IMPACT.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KARLA MURTHY
REPORTS ON AN UNORTHODOX IDEA
GAINING TRACTION: THE VOTE SWAP.
>> Reporter: 25-YEAR-OLD SADIQ
KHAN IS A HILLARY CLINTON
SUPPORTER, BUT HE DOESN'T THINK
HIS VOTE MATTERS MUCH BECAUSE HE
LIVES IN NEW JERSEY, A STATE
THAT'S VOTED DEMOCRATIC IN THE
LAST SIX PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
AND IS EXPECTED TO DO SO AGAIN
ON TUESDAY.
>> GROWING UP IN SCHOOL, YOU
LEARN ABOUT HOW IT'S A CIVIC
DUTY TO SHOW UP AT THE POLLS AND
HAVE YOUR VOICE HEARD.
BUT IN MY YOUNG VOTING HISTORY,
I'VE BEEN INVOLVED IN TWO
PRESIDENT ELECTIONS NOW, AND IT
ALMOST ALWAYS SEEMS LIKE IN NEW
JERSEY, IT'S ALWAYS SOLID BLUE.
AND NO MATTER EVEN IF I VOTED OR
NOT, YOU KNOW, MY VOTE, MY VOICE
REALLY DOESN'T COUNT.
>> Reporter: NOW, MEET 23-YEAR-
OLD ANLIN WANG.
HE PREFERS GREEN PARTY CANDIDATE
JILL STEIN.
>> HER PLATFORM STANDS FOR MORE
OF THE DIRECTION I WOULD LIKE TO
SEE U.S. POLITICS GO IN.
>> Reporter: ANY THIRD PARTY
WHOSE CANDIDATE GETS 5% OF THE
NATIONAL POPULAR VOTE QUALIFIES
FOR FEDERAL FUNDING.
BUT WANG LIVES IN THE
BATTLEGROUND STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA, AND HE WORRIES A
VOTE FOR STEIN INSTEAD OF
CLINTON COULD HELP DONALD TRUMP
WIN HIS STATE.
>> BECAUSE I LIVE IN PA RATHER
THAN ONE OF THOSE SAFE STATES,
RIGHT, LIKE, THERE IS AN
EXPONENTIALLY GREATER CHANCE
THAT MY VOTE COULD BE THE ONE
THAT MAKES THAT DIFFERENCE.
>> Reporter: ANLIN WANG AND
SADIQ KHAN HAD NEVER MET BEFORE,
BUT THEY ARE TRYING TO SOLVE
EACH OTHER'S DILEMMAS BY USING A
STRATEGY CALLED VOTE SWAPPING.
VOTE SWAPPING HAS BEEN TRIED
BEFORE.
IN THIS ELECTION, IT'S BEING
USED BY DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS WHO WANT TO DEFEAT
TRUMP.
HERE'S HOW IT WORKS: ON ONE
SIDE, YOU HAVE A VOTER WHO LIVES
IN A CLOSELY-FOUGHT BATTLEGROUND
STATE LIKE PENNSYLVANIA WHO
SUPPORTS A THIRD PARTY
CANDIDATE-- IN THIS CASE, GREEN
PARTY CANDIDATE JILL STEIN; ON
THE OTHER SIDE, YOU HAVE A VOTER
WHO LIVES IN A "SAFE" STATE LIKE
NEW JERSEY, WHO SUPPORTS HILLARY
CLINTON.
THEY THEN DECIDE TO VOTE FOR
EACH OTHER'S PREFERRED
CANDIDATE, ESSENTIALLY SWAPPING
THEIR VOTES.
A HANDFUL OF VOTE SWAPPING WEB
SITES, APPS AND FACEBOOK GROUPS
HAVE SPRUNG UP THIS ELECTION
YEAR, CONNECTING VOTERS FROM ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY.
SADIQ KHAN READ ABOUT A VOTE
TRADING APP CALLED #NEVERTRUMP.
HE DOWNLOADED IT ONTO HIS PHONE
AND JOINED A MESSAGE GROUP.
>> AND YOU WOULD POST ON THE
FORUM AND IDENTIFY WHO YOU WERE
GOING TO VOTE FOR, WHERE YOU'RE
FROM AND IF YOU WERE WILLING TO
TRADE.
>> Reporter: IN PENNSYLVANIA,
ANLIN WANG ALSO READ ABOUT THE
APP AND JOINED THE GROUP, WHICH
HAS NEARLY 10,000 ACTIVE USERS.
>> I JUST MADE A POST THERE AND
SAID, "I LIVE IN PA, WILLING TO
TRADE MY VOTE."
>> QUICKLY REALIZED THAT WE'D BE
GOOD TRADING PARTNERS.
>> Reporter: KHAN AGREED TO VOTE
FOR JILL STEIN IN NEW JERSEY;
AND WANG, FOR HILLARY CLINTON IN
PENNSYLVANIA.
BOTH SEE THIS AS A WIN.
>> ANLIN IN PENNSYLVANIA IS ABLE
TO MAKE SURE THAT, YOU KNOW, HIS
VOTE FOR JILL STEIN IS BEING
CAST, AND I WAS USING THIS
PROCESS TO ALMOST AMPLIFY MY
VOICE AND MAKE IT HEARD IN A WAY
THAT ACTUALLY MATTERS.
>> Reporter: TWO ADVOCATES OF
VOTE SWAPPING ARE JOHN STUBBS
AND RICARDO REYES, BOTH
REPUBLICANS WHO WORKED IN THE
GEORGE W. BUSH ADMINISTRATION.
THEY WROTE A "NEW YORK TIMES"
OP-ED IN SEPTEMBER APPEALING TO
FELLOW REPUBLICANS IN SAFE
STATES TO SWAP THEIR VOTES WITH
PEOPLE IN BATTLEGROUND STATES.
>> PEOPLEWERETELLING US THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO STAY HOME
BECAUSE THEIR VOTE DIDN'T
MATTER.
THAT MAKES NO SENSE.
>> IF YOU LIVE IN CALIFORNIA,
YOUR VOTE IS GOING TO COUNT IN A
STATE THAT DOES NOT HAVE AS MUCH
INFLUENCE AS OHIO OR FLORIDA OR
PENNSYLVANIA.
WE NEED TO FIGURE OUT A SYSTEM
THAT ALLOWS EVERYONE TO
PARTICIPATE FULLY.
>> Reporter: REYES AND STUBBS
LAUNCHED A VOTE TRADING WEB SITE
CALLED "TRUMPTRADERS," WHICH HAS
OVER 15,000 USERS.
>> YOU TELL US WHO YOU ARE
VOTING FOR, YOU TELL US WHERE
YOU LIVE, AND YOU GIVE US YOUR
EMAIL ADDRESS.
>> Reporter: THEY THEN FIND YOU
A PARTNER TO SWAP VOTES WITH.
>> THERE'S NO CONTRACT, IT'S
JUST THE HONOR CODE.
AND IT'S MORE THAN JUST THE
HONOR CODE; IT'S ME TALKING TO
YOU, IT'S ME TALKING TO MY
FRIENDS IN FLORIDA AND OHIO.
>> Reporter: THEIR WEB SITE ALSO
OFFERS A TWO-FOR-ONE SPECIAL.
FOR EXAMPLE, IF YOU WANT TO VOTE
FOR LIBERTARIAN GARY JOHNSON AND
YOU LIVE IN OHIO, THEY'LL FIND
YOU TWO CLINTON VOTERS IN A SAFE
STATE LIKE CALIFORNIA TO SWITCH
WITH YOU.
>> HOPEFULLY ONE DAY THERE WILL
BE MORE OPTIONS FOR VOTERS.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY,
ANYTHING THAT ISN'T A VOTE FOR
TRUMP OR A VOTE FOR HILLARY IS A
PROTEST VOTE.
AND WHAT HE OR SHE WANTS IS
REPRESENTATION, MAXIMUM
REPRESENTATION FOR THIS THIRD
PARTY OR FOR THOSE POINTS OF
VIEWS OR FOR THE VALUES OF THAT
THIRD PARTY.
AND SO, THIS MECHANISM ACTUALLY
IS VERY GOOD FOR THAT.
>> Reporter: IT SOUNDS LIKE
SOMETHING THAT SHOULD BE
ILLEGAL.
>> IT... IT'S NOT.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, IN 2007,
THE NINTH CIRCUIT COURT OF
APPEALS RULED THAT VOTE SWAPPING
WEB SITES ARE PROTECTED FREE
SPEECH UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT
BECAUSE NOTHING OF MONETARY
VALUE IS BEING EXCHANGED.
THE CASE GOES BACK TO THE 2000
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WHEN VOTE
TRADING WEB SITES SOUGHT TO GET
BATTLEGROUND STATE SUPPORTERS OF
THEN-GREEN PARTY NOMINEE RALPH
NADER TO SWAP THEIR VOTES WITH
AL GORE SUPPORTERS IN SAFE
STATES.
BUT YOU'RE ENCOURAGING VOTERS,
ENCOURAGING PEOPLE TO TRADE
VOTES FROM PEOPLE WHO LIVE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY FROM EACH
OTHER.
>> SURE.
>> Reporter: I MEAN, IS THAT
REALLY THE WAY OUR DEMOCRACY IS
SUPPOSED TO WORK?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
IN A NATIONAL ELECTION WHERE THE
OUTCOME AFFECTS US ALL EXACTLY
THE SAME?
THIS IS A NATIONAL ELECTION.
JUST BECAUSE WE HAVE AN
ELECTORAL COLLEGE SYSTEM THAT
WAS DESIGNED WHEN WE WERE STILL
SENDING MAIL BY PONY DOESN'T
MEAN THAT WE CAN'T UPGRADE OUR
OWN EXPRESSION OF PREFERENCE.
WE HAVE THE TECHNOLOGY THAT
ALLOWS PEOPLE TO COMMUNICATE BY
PUSHING A BUTTON ON SOMETHING
THEY CARRY AROUND IN THEIR
POCKET.
WHY WOULDN'T WE BE TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THAT?
>> Reporter: LAST WEEKEND, SADIQ
KHAN AND ANLIN WANG DECIDED TO
MEET IN PERSON AND MAIL THEIR
ABSENTEE BALLOTS TOGETHER...
>> READY TO TRADE?
>> YEP!
>> Reporter: ...BUT WE WON'T
KNOW WHAT DIFFERENCE, IF ANY,
THESE VOTE SWAPPERS WILL
HAVE UNTIL ELECTION DAY.
>> Stewart: THE ALMOST THREE-
WEEK-OLD IRAQI OFFENSIVE TO
RETAKE MOSUL FROM ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS CONTINUED TODAY ON TWO
FRONTS.
BACKED BY AMERICAN AIR SUPPORT,
IRAQI TROOPS BATTLED ISIS
FIGHTERS TEN MILES SOUTH OF
MOSUL IN HAMMAN AL-ALIL TODAY,
THE LAST TOWN BETWEEN THEM AND
MOSUL ITSELF.
THOSE IRAQI TROOPS PLAN TO LINK
UP WITH OTHER IRAQI AND ALLIED
FORCES ADVANCING ON MOSUL FROM
THE EAST, WHERE THEY CLEARED
BUILDINGS IN ISIS-HELD
NEIGHBORHOODS THEY ENTERED
YESTERDAY.
THE FINAL PUSH TO ENTER THE CITY
COULD PROVE LONG AND BLOODY.
NEW SATELLITE IMAGES TAKEN THIS
WEEK SHOW HOW ISIS DEFENDERS
HAVE ERECTED CONCRETE BARRICADES
TO BLOCK KEY ACCESS ROUTES.
AN ESTIMATED ONE MILLION
CIVILIANS REMAIN IN MOSUL,
IRAQ'S SECOND LARGEST CITY AND
THE LAST REMAINING ISIS
STRONGHOLD IN THE COUNTRY.
IN TURKEY, PRESIDENT ERDOGAN'S
CRACKDOWN ON DISSENT GREW WIDER
TODAY AS TURKISH POLICE ARRESTED
THE TOP EDITOR AND EIGHT SENIOR
STAFFERS OF A LEADING OPPOSITION
NEWSPAPER.
ABOUT 1,000 PROTESTERS WHO
MARCHED TOWARD THE NEWSPAPER
OFFICES IN ISTANBUL WERE
DISPERSED BY WATER CANNONS AND
TEAR GAS.
TURKISH POLICE TODAY ALSO
DETAINED NINE OFFICIALS OF THE
PRO-KURDISH PEOPLES' DEMOCRATIC
PARTY, WHICH FOLLOWED THE ARREST
OF THE PARTY'S TWO LEADERS
YESTERDAY.
ERDOGAN HAS LONG ACCUSED THAT
OPPOSITION PARTY OF HAVING TIES
TO THE OUTLAWED KURDISH
MILITANTS.
SINCE A FAILED COUP IN JULY,
ERDOGAN'S GOVERNMENT HAS
DETAINED OR SUSPENDED FROM THEIR
JOBS 110,000 JUDGES, TEACHERS
AND CIVIL SERVANTS.
AN INTERNET MONITORING GROUP
SAYS THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO
BEEN BLOCKING OR RESTRICTING
ACCESS TO SOCIAL MEDIA SITES,
INCLUDING TWITTER, FACEBOOK,
YOUTUBE, WHATSAPP, SKYPE AND
INSTAGRAM.
IN THE SOUTH KOREAN CAPITAL OF
SEOUL TONIGHT, TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF PROTESTERS RALLIED TO DEMAND
THE RESIGNATION OF PRESIDENT
PARK GEUN-HAY OVER AN INFLUENCE-
PEDDLING SCANDAL.
OPPONENTS ACCUSE HER OF ALLOWING
A CLOSE FRIEND TO MEDDLE IN
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS AND OBTAIN
ACCESS TO CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
USED TO ALLEGEDLY EXTORT
BUSINESSES.
PRESIDENT PARK APOLOGIZED
YESTERDAY AND PLEDGED
COOPERATION WITH THE
INVESTIGATION.
HER APPROVAL RATING HAS SUNK TO
5%.
DELHI'S GOVERNMENT HAS COME
UNDER FIRE FOR IGNORING THE
WARNING SIGNS LEADING UP TO THE
CURRENT AIR POLLUTION CRISIS.
SEE MORE AT pbs.org/newshour.
THE SUPREME COURT TODAY
REINSTATED A NEW ARIZONA LAW
PROHIBITING ANYONE BESIDES
FAMILY MEMBERS AND CAREGIVERS
FROM COLLECTING OR TURNING IN
ANYONE ELSE'S EARLY VOTING
BALLOT.
THE ORDER OVERTURNS YESTERDAY'S
APPEALS COURT RULING BLOCKING
THE LAW.
REPUBLICANS SAY THE LAW PREVENTS
FRAUD, BUT DEMOCRATS COMPLAIN IT
MAKES IT HARDER FOR SOME RURAL
AND MINORITY VOTERS TO RETURN
THEIR BALLOTS.
ARIZONA HAS APPROXIMATELY
900,000 OUTSTANDING BALLOTS
WHICH MUST BE RETURNED BY MAIL
OR IN PERSON BY TUESDAY IN ORDER
TO COUNT.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.